<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>ACT II</h3>
			<h3>SCENE I. A Sea-port in Cyprus. An open place near the quay.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter Montano and two Gentlemen</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.1">What from the cape can you discern at sea?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>First Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.2">Nothing at all: it is a highwrought flood;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.3">I cannot, ’twixt the heaven and the main,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.4">Descry a sail.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.5">Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.6">A fuller blast ne’er shook our battlements:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.7">If it hath ruffian’d so upon the sea,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.8">What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.9">Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>Second Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.10">A segregation of the Turkish fleet:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.11">For do but stand upon the foaming shore,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.12">The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.13">The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.14">seems to cast water on the burning bear,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.15">And quench the guards of the ever-fixed pole:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.16">I never did like molestation view</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.17">On the enchafed flood.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.18">If that the Turkish fleet</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.19">Be not enshelter’d and embay’d, they are drown’d:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.20">It is impossible they bear it out.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter a third Gentleman</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>Third Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.21">News, lads! our wars are done.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.22">The desperate tempest hath so bang’d the Turks,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.23">That their designment halts: a noble ship of Venice</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.24">Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.25">On most part of their fleet.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.26">How! is this true?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>Third Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.27">The ship is here put in,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.28">A Veronesa; Michael Cassio,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.29">Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.30">Is come on shore: the Moor himself at sea,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.31">And is in full commission here for Cyprus.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.32">I am glad on’t; ’tis a worthy governor.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>Third Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.33">But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.34">Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.35">And prays the Moor be safe; for they were parted</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.36">With foul and violent tempest.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.37">Pray heavens he be;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.38">For I have served him, and the man commands</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.39">Like a full soldier. Let’s to the seaside, ho!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.40">As well to see the vessel that’s come in</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.41">As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.42">Even till we make the main and the aerial blue</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.43">An indistinct regard.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>Third Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.44">Come, let’s do so:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.45">For every minute is expectancy</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.46">Of more arrivance.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter Cassio</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.47">Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.48">That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.49">Give him defence against the elements,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.50">For I have lost us him on a dangerous sea.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.51">Is he well shipp’d?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.52">His bark is stoutly timber’d, his pilot</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.53">Of very expert and approved allowance;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.54">Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.55">Stand in bold cure.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>A cry within ‘A sail, a sail, a sail!’</i>
				</p>
				<p>
					<i>Enter a fourth Gentleman</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.56">What noise?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>Fourth Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.57">The town is empty; on the brow o’ the sea</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.58">Stand ranks of people, and they cry ‘A sail!’</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.59">My hopes do shape him for the governor.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Guns heard</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>Second Gentlemen</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.60">They do discharge their shot of courtesy:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.61">Our friends at least.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.62">I pray you, sir, go forth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.63">And give us truth who ’tis that is arrived.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>Second Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.64">I shall.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.65">But, good lieutenant, is your general wived?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.66">Most fortunately: he hath achieved a maid</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.67">That paragons description and wild fame;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.68">One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.69">And in the essential vesture of creation</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.70">Does tire the ingener.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter second Gentleman</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.1.71">How now! who has put in?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>Second Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.72">’Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.73">Has had most favourable and happy speed:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.74">Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.75">The gutter’d rocks and congregated sands⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.76">Traitors ensteep’d to clog the guiltless keel⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.77">As having sense of beauty, do omit</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.78">Their mortal natures, letting go safely by</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.79">The divine Desdemona.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.80">What is she?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.81">She that I spake of, our great captain’s captain,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.82">Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.83">Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.84">A se’nnight’s speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.85">And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.86">That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.87">Make love’s quick pants in Desdemona’s arms,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.88">Give renew’d fire to our extincted spirits</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.89">And bring all Cyprus comfort!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter Desdemona, Emilia, Iago, Roderigo, and Attendants</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.1.90">O, behold,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.91">The riches of the ship is come on shore!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.92">Ye men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.93">Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of heaven,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.94">Before, behind thee, and on every hand,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.95">Enwheel thee round!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech28">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.96">I thank you, valiant Cassio.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.97">What tidings can you tell me of my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech29">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.98">He is not yet arrived: nor know I aught</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.99">But that he’s well and will be shortly here.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech30">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.100">O, but I fear⁠—How lost you company?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech31">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.101">The great contention of the sea and skies</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.102">Parted our fellowship⁠—But, hark! a sail.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Within ‘A sail, a sail!’ Guns heard</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech32">
				<b>Second Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.103">They give their greeting to the citadel;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.104">This likewise is a friend.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech33">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.105">See for the news.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit Gentleman</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.1.106">Good ancient, you are welcome.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>To Emilia</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.1.107">Welcome, mistress.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.108">Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.109">That I extend my manners; ’tis my breeding</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.110">That gives me this bold show of courtesy.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Kissing her</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech34">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.111">Sir, would she give you so much of her lips</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.112">As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.113">You’ll have enough.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech35">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.114">Alas, she has no speech.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech36">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.115">In faith, too much;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.116">I find it still, when I have list to sleep:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.117">Marry, before your ladyship, I grant,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.118">She puts her tongue a little in her heart,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.119">And chides with thinking.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech37">
				<b>Emilia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.120">You have little cause to say so.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech38">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.121">Come on, come on; you are pictures out of doors,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.122">Bells in your parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.123">Saints m your injuries, devils being offended,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.124">Players in your housewifery, and housewives’ in your beds.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech39">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.125">O, fie upon thee, slanderer!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech40">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.126">Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.127">You rise to play and go to bed to work.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech41">
				<b>Emilia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.128">You shall not write my praise.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech42">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.129">No, let me not.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech43">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.130">What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.131">praise me?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech44">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.132">O gentle lady, do not put me to’t;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.133">For I am nothing, if not critical.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech45">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.134">Come on assay. There’s one gone to the harbour?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech46">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.135">Ay, madam.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech47">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.136">I am not merry; but I do beguile</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.137">The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.138">Come, how wouldst thou praise me?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech48">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.139">I am about it; but indeed my invention</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.140">Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frize;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.141">It plucks out brains and all: but my Muse labours,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.142">And thus she is deliver’d.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.143">If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.144">The one’s for use, the other useth it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech49">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.145">Well praised! How if she be black and witty?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech50">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.146">If she be black, and thereto have a wit,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.147">She’ll find a white that shall her blackness fit.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech51">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.148">Worse and worse.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech52">
				<b>Emilia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.149">How if fair and foolish?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech53">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.150">She never yet was foolish that was fair;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.151">For even her folly help’d her to an heir.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech54">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.152">These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.153">the alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.154">her that’s foul and foolish?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech55">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.155">There’s none so foul and foolish thereunto,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.156">But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech56">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.157">O heavy ignorance! thou praisest the worst best.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.158">But what praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.159">woman indeed, one that, in the authority of her</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.160">merit, did justly put on the vouch of very malice itself?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech57">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.161">She that was ever fair and never proud,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.162">Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.163">Never lack’d gold and yet went never gay,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.164">Fled from her wish and yet said ‘Now I may,’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.165">She that being anger’d, her revenge being nigh,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.166">Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.167">She that in wisdom never was so frail</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.168">To change the cod’s head for the salmon’s tail;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.169">She that could think and ne’er disclose her mind,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.170">See suitors following and not look behind,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.171">She was a wight, if ever such wight were⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech58">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.172">To do what?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech59">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.173">To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech60">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.174">O most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.175">of him, Emilia, though he be thy husband. How say</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.176">you, Cassio? is he not a most profane and liberal</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.177">counsellor?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech61">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.178">He speaks home, madam: You may relish him more in</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.179">the soldier than in the scholar.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech62">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.180">[Aside] He takes her by the palm: ay, well said,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.181">whisper: with as little a web as this will I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.182">ensnare as great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.183">her, do; I will gyve thee in thine own courtship.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.184">You say true; ’tis so, indeed: if such tricks as</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.185">these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.186">been better you had not kissed your three fingers so</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.187">oft, which now again you are most apt to play the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.188">sir in. Very good; well kissed! an excellent</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.189">courtesy! ’tis so, indeed. Yet again your fingers</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.190">to your lips? would they were clyster-pipes for your sake!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Trumpet within</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.1.191">The Moor! I know his trumpet.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech63">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.192">’Tis truly so.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech64">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.193">Let’s meet him and receive him.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech65">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.194">Lo, where he comes!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter Othello and Attendants</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech66">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.195">O my fair warrior!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech67">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.196">My dear Othello!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech68">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.197">It gives me wonder great as my content</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.198">To see you here before me. O my soul’s joy!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.199">If after every tempest come such calms,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.200">May the winds blow till they have waken’d death!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.201">And let the labouring bark climb hills of seas</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.202">Olympus-high and duck again as low</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.203">As hell’s from heaven! If it were now to die,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.204">’Twere now to be most happy; for, I fear,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.205">My soul hath her content so absolute</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.206">That not another comfort like to this</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.207">Succeeds in unknown fate.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech69">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.208">The heavens forbid</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.209">But that our loves and comforts should increase,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.210">Even as our days do grow!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech70">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.211">Amen to that, sweet powers!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.212">I cannot speak enough of this content;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.213">It stops me here; it is too much of joy:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.214">And this, and this, the greatest discords be</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Kissing her</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.1.215">That e’er our hearts shall make!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech71">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.216">[Aside] O, you are well tuned now!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.217">But I’ll set down the pegs that make this music,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.218">As honest as I am.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech72">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.219">Come, let us to the castle.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.220">News, friends; our wars are done, the Turks</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.221">are drown’d.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.222">How does my old acquaintance of this isle?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.223">Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.224">I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.225">I prattle out of fashion, and I dote</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.226">In mine own comforts. I prithee, good Iago,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.227">Go to the bay and disembark my coffers:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.228">Bring thou the master to the citadel;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.229">He is a good one, and his worthiness</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.230">Does challenge much respect. Come, Desdemona,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.231">Once more, well met at Cyprus.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt Othello, Desdemona, and Attendants</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech73">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.232">Do thou meet me presently at the harbour. Come</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.233">hither. If thou be’st valiant⁠—as, they say, base</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.234">men being in love have then a nobility in their</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.235">natures more than is native to them⁠—list me. The</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.236">lieutenant tonight watches on the court of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.237">guard:⁠—first, I must tell thee this⁠—Desdemona is</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.238">directly in love with him.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech74">
				<b>Roderigo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.239">With him! why, ’tis not possible.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech75">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.240">Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.241">Mark me with what violence she first loved the Moor,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.242">but for bragging and telling her fantastical lies:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.243">and will she love him still for prating? let not</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.244">thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.245">and what delight shall she have to look on the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.246">devil? When the blood is made dull with the act of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.247">sport, there should be, again to inflame it and to</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.248">give satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favour,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.249">sympathy in years, manners and beauties; all which</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.250">the Moor is defective in: now, for want of these</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.251">required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.252">find itself abused, begin to heave the gorge,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.253">disrelish and abhor the Moor; very nature will</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.254">instruct her in it and compel her to some second</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.255">choice. Now, sir, this granted⁠—as it is a most</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.256">pregnant and unforced position⁠—who stands so</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.257">eminent in the degree of this fortune as Cassio</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.258">does? a knave very voluble; no further</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.259">conscionable than in putting on the mere form of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.260">civil and humane seeming, for the better compassing</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.261">of his salt and most hidden loose affection? why,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.262">none; why, none: a slipper and subtle knave, a</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.263">finder of occasions, that has an eye can stamp and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.264">counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.265">present itself; a devilish knave. Besides, the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.266">knave is handsome, young, and hath all those</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.267">requisites in him that folly and green minds look</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.268">after: a pestilent complete knave; and the woman</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.269">hath found him already.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech76">
				<b>Roderigo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.270">I cannot believe that in her; she’s full of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.271">most blessed condition.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech77">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.272">Blessed fig’s-end! the wine she drinks is made of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.273">grapes: if she had been blessed, she would never</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.274">have loved the Moor. Blessed pudding! Didst thou</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.275">not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? didst</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.276">not mark that?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech78">
				<b>Roderigo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.277">Yes, that I did; but that was but courtesy.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech79">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.278">Lechery, by this hand; an index and obscure prologue</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.279">to the history of lust and foul thoughts. They met</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.280">so near with their lips that their breaths embraced</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.281">together. Villanous thoughts, Roderigo! when these</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.282">mutualities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.283">the master and main exercise, the incorporate</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.284">conclusion, Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by me: I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.285">have brought you from Venice. Watch you to-night;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.286">for the command, I’ll lay’t upon you. Cassio knows</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.287">you not. I’ll not be far from you: do you find</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.288">some occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.289">too loud, or tainting his discipline; or from what</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.290">other course you please, which the time shall more</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.291">favourably minister.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech80">
				<b>Roderigo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.292">Well.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech81">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.293">Sir, he is rash and very sudden in choler, and haply</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.294">may strike at you: provoke him, that he may; for</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.295">even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.296">mutiny; whose qualification shall come into no true</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.297">taste again but by the displanting of Cassio. So</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.298">shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.299">the means I shall then have to prefer them; and the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.300">impediment most profitably removed, without the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.301">which there were no expectation of our prosperity.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech82">
				<b>Roderigo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.302">I will do this, if I can bring it to any</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.303">opportunity.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech83">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.304">I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.305">I must fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech84">
				<b>Roderigo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.306">Adieu.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech85">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.307">That Cassio loves her, I do well believe it;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.308">That she loves him, ’tis apt and of great credit:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.309">The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.310">Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.311">And I dare think he’ll prove to Desdemona</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.312">A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.313">Not out of absolute lust, though peradventure</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.314">I stand accountant for as great a sin,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.315">But partly led to diet my revenge,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.316">For that I do suspect the lusty Moor</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.317">Hath leap’d into my seat; the thought whereof</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.318">Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.319">And nothing can or shall content my soul</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.320">Till I am even’d with him, wife for wife,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.321">Or failing so, yet that I put the Moor</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.322">At least into a jealousy so strong</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.323">That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.324">If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trash</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.325">For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.326">I’ll have our Michael Cassio on the hip,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.327">Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.328">For I fear Cassio with my night-cap too⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.329">Make the Moor thank me, love me and reward me.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.330">For making him egregiously an ass</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.331">And practising upon his peace and quiet</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.332">Even to madness. ’Tis here, but yet confused:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.333">Knavery’s plain face is never seen tin used.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE II. A street.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter a Herald with a proclamation; People following</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>Herald</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.1">It is Othello’s pleasure, our noble and valiant</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.2">general, that, upon certain tidings now arrived,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.3">importing the mere perdition of the Turkish fleet,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.4">every man put himself into triumph; some to dance,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.5">some to make bonfires, each man to what sport and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.6">revels his addiction leads him: for, besides these</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.7">beneficial news, it is the celebration of his</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.8">nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.9">proclaimed. All offices are open, and there is full</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.10">liberty of feasting from this present hour of five</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.11">till the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.12">isle of Cyprus and our noble general Othello!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE III. A hall in the castle.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio, and Attendants</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.1">Good Michael, look you to the guard to-night:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.2">Let’s teach ourselves that honourable stop,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.3">Not to outsport discretion.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.4">Iago hath direction what to do;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.5">But, notwithstanding, with my personal eye</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.6">Will I look to’t.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.7">Iago is most honest.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.8">Michael, good night: to-morrow with your earliest</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.9">Let me have speech with you.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>To Desdemona</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.3.10">Come, my dear love,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.11">The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.12">That profit’s yet to come ’tween me and you.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.13">Good night.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt Othello, Desdemona, and Attendants</i>
				</p>
				<p>
					<i>Enter Iago</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.14">Welcome, Iago; we must to the watch.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.15">Not this hour, lieutenant; ’tis not yet ten o’ the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.16">clock. Our general cast us thus early for the love</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.17">of his Desdemona; who let us not therefore blame:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.18">he hath not yet made wanton the night with her; and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.19">she is sport for Jove.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.20">She’s a most exquisite lady.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.21">And, I’ll warrant her, fun of game.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.22">Indeed, she’s a most fresh and delicate creature.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.23">What an eye she has! methinks it sounds a parley of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.24">provocation.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.25">An inviting eye; and yet methinks right modest.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.26">And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.27">She is indeed perfection.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.28">Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.29">have a stoup of wine; and here without are a brace</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.30">of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.31">the health of black Othello.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.32">Not to-night, good Iago: I have very poor and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.33">unhappy brains for drinking: I could well wish</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.34">courtesy would invent some other custom of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.35">entertainment.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.36">O, they are our friends; but one cup: I’ll drink for</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.37">you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.38">I have drunk but one cup to-night, and that was</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.39">craftily qualified too, and, behold, what innovation</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.40">it makes here: I am unfortunate in the infirmity,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.41">and dare not task my weakness with any more.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.42">What, man! ’tis a night of revels: the gallants</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.43">desire it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.44">Where are they?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.45">Here at the door; I pray you, call them in.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.46">I’ll do’t; but it dislikes me.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.47">If I can fasten but one cup upon him,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.48">With that which he hath drunk to-night already,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.49">He’ll be as full of quarrel and offence</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.50">As my young mistress’ dog. Now, my sick fool Roderigo,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.51">Whom love hath turn’d almost the wrong side out,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.52">To Desdemona hath to-night caroused</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.53">Potations pottle-deep; and he’s to watch:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.54">Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.55">That hold their honours in a wary distance,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.56">The very elements of this warlike isle,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.57">Have I to-night fluster’d with flowing cups,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.58">And they watch too. Now, ’mongst this flock of drunkards,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.59">Am I to put our Cassio in some action</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.60">That may offend the isle.⁠—But here they come:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.61">If consequence do but approve my dream,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.62">My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter Cassio; with him Montano and Gentlemen; servants following with wine</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.63">‘Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.64">Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I am</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.65">a soldier.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.66">Some wine, ho!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Sings</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.3.67">And let me the canakin clink, clink;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.68">And let me the canakin clink</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.69">A soldier’s a man;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.70">A life’s but a span;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.71">Why, then, let a soldier drink.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.72">Some wine, boys!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.73">‘Fore God, an excellent song.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.74">I learned it in England, where, indeed, they are</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.75">most potent in potting: your Dane, your German, and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.76">your swag-bellied Hollander⁠—Drink, ho!⁠—are nothing</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.77">to your English.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.78">Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech28">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.79">Why, he drinks you, with facility, your Dane dead</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.80">drunk; he sweats not to overthrow your Almain; he</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.81">gives your Hollander a vomit, ere the next pottle</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.82">can be filled.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech29">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.83">To the health of our general!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech30">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.84">I am for it, lieutenant; and I’ll do you justice.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech31">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.85">O sweet England!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.86">King Stephen was a worthy peer,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.87">His breeches cost him but a crown;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.88">He held them sixpence all too dear,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.89">With that he call’d the tailor lown.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.90">He was a wight of high renown,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.91">And thou art but of low degree:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.92">’Tis pride that pulls the country down;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.93">Then take thine auld cloak about thee.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.94">Some wine, ho!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech32">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.95">Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech33">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.96">Will you hear’t again?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech34">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.97">No; for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.98">does those things. Well, God’s above all; and there</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.99">be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech35">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.100">It’s true, good lieutenant.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech36">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.101">For mine own part⁠—no offence to the general, nor</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.102">any man of quality⁠—I hope to be saved.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech37">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.103">And so do I too, lieutenant.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech38">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.104">Ay, but, by your leave, not before me; the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.105">lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient. Let’s</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.106">have no more of this; let’s to our affairs.⁠—Forgive</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.107">us our sins!⁠—Gentlemen, let’s look to our business.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.108">Do not think, gentlemen. I am drunk: this is my</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.109">ancient; this is my right hand, and this is my left:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.110">I am not drunk now; I can stand well enough, and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.111">speak well enough.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech39">
				<b>All</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.112">Excellent well.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech40">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.113">Why, very well then; you must not think then that I am drunk.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech41">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.114">To the platform, masters; come, let’s set the watch.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech42">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.115">You see this fellow that is gone before;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.116">He is a soldier fit to stand by Caesar</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.117">And give direction: and do but see his vice;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.118">’Tis to his virtue a just equinox,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.119">The one as long as the other: ’tis pity of him.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.120">I fear the trust Othello puts him in.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.121">On some odd time of his infirmity,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.122">Will shake this island.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech43">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.123">But is he often thus?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech44">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.124">’Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.125">He’ll watch the horologe a double set,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.126">If drink rock not his cradle.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech45">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.127">It were well</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.128">The general were put in mind of it.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.129">Perhaps he sees it not; or his good nature</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.130">Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.131">And looks not on his evils: is not this true?</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter Roderigo</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech46">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.132">[Aside to him] How now, Roderigo!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.133">I pray you, after the lieutenant; go.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit Roderigo</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech47">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.134">And ’tis great pity that the noble Moor</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.135">Should hazard such a place as his own second</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.136">With one of an ingraft infirmity:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.137">It were an honest action to say</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.138">So to the Moor.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech48">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.139">Not I, for this fair island:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.140">I do love Cassio well; and would do much</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.141">To cure him of this evil⁠—But, hark! what noise?</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Cry within: ‘Help! help!’</i>
				</p>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter Cassio, driving in Roderigo</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech49">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.142">You rogue! you rascal!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech50">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.143">What’s the matter, lieutenant?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech51">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.144">A knave teach me my duty!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.145">I’ll beat the knave into a twiggen bottle.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech52">
				<b>Roderigo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.146">Beat me!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech53">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.147">Dost thou prate, rogue?</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Striking Roderigo</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech54">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.148">Nay, good lieutenant;</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Staying him</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.3.149">I pray you, sir, hold your hand.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech55">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.150">Let me go, sir,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.151">Or I’ll knock you o’er the mazzard.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech56">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.152">Come, come,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.153">you’re drunk.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech57">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.154">Drunk!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>They fight</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech58">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.155">[Aside to Roderigo] Away, I say; go out, and cry a mutiny.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit Roderigo</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.3.156">Nay, good lieutenant⁠—alas, gentlemen;⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.157">Help, ho!⁠—Lieutenant⁠—sir⁠—Montano⁠—sir;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.158">Help, masters!⁠—Here’s a goodly watch indeed!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Bell rings</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.3.159">Who’s that which rings the bell?⁠—Diablo, ho!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.160">The town will rise: God’s will, lieutenant, hold!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.161">You will be shamed for ever.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter Othello and Attendants</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech59">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.162">What is the matter here?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech60">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.163">‘Zounds, I bleed still; I am hurt to the death.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Faints</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech61">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.164">Hold, for your lives!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech62">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.165">Hold, ho! Lieutenant⁠—sir⁠—Montano⁠—gentlemen⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.166">Have you forgot all sense of place and duty?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.167">Hold! the general speaks to you; hold, hold, for shame!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech63">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.168">Why, how now, ho! from whence ariseth this?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.169">Are we turn’d Turks, and to ourselves do that</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.170">Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.171">For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.172">He that stirs next to carve for his own rage</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.173">Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.174">Silence that dreadful bell: it frights the isle</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.175">From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.176">Honest Iago, that look’st dead with grieving,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.177">Speak, who began this? on thy love, I charge thee.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech64">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.178">I do not know: friends all but now, even now,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.179">In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.180">Devesting them for bed; and then, but now⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.181">As if some planet had unwitted men⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.182">Swords out, and tilting one at other’s breast,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.183">In opposition bloody. I cannot speak</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.184">Any beginning to this peevish odds;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.185">And would in action glorious I had lost</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.186">Those legs that brought me to a part of it!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech65">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.187">How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech66">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.188">I pray you, pardon me; I cannot speak.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech67">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.189">Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.190">The gravity and stillness of your youth</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.191">The world hath noted, and your name is great</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.192">In mouths of wisest censure: what’s the matter,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.193">That you unlace your reputation thus</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.194">And spend your rich opinion for the name</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.195">Of a night-brawler? give me answer to it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech68">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.196">Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.197">Your officer, Iago, can inform you⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.198">While I spare speech, which something now</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.199">offends me⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.200">Of all that I do know: nor know I aught</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.201">By me that’s said or done amiss this night;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.202">Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.203">And to defend ourselves it be a sin</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.204">When violence assails us.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech69">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.205">Now, by heaven,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.206">My blood begins my safer guides to rule;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.207">And passion, having my best judgment collied,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.208">Assays to lead the way: if I once stir,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.209">Or do but lift this arm, the best of you</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.210">Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.211">How this foul rout began, who set it on;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.212">And he that is approved in this offence,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.213">Though he had twinn’d with me, both at a birth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.214">Shall lose me. What! in a town of war,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.215">Yet wild, the people’s hearts brimful of fear,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.216">To manage private and domestic quarrel,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.217">In night, and on the court and guard of safety!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.218">’Tis monstrous. Iago, who began’t?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech70">
				<b>Montano</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.219">If partially affined, or leagued in office,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.220">Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.221">Thou art no soldier.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech71">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.222">Touch me not so near:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.223">I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.224">Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.225">Yet, I persuade myself, to speak the truth</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.226">Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.227">Montano and myself being in speech,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.228">There comes a fellow crying out for help:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.229">And Cassio following him with determined sword,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.230">To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.231">Steps in to Cassio, and entreats his pause:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.232">Myself the crying fellow did pursue,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.233">Lest by his clamour⁠—as it so fell out⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.234">The town might fall in fright: he, swift of foot,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.235">Outran my purpose; and I return’d the rather</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.236">For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.237">And Cassio high in oath; which till to-night</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.238">I ne’er might say before. When I came back⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.239">For this was brief⁠—I found them close together,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.240">At blow and thrust; even as again they were</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.241">When you yourself did part them.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.242">More of this matter cannot I report:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.243">But men are men; the best sometimes forget:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.244">Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.245">As men in rage strike those that wish them best,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.246">Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.247">From him that fled some strange indignity,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.248">Which patience could not pass.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech72">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.249">I know, Iago,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.250">Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.251">Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.252">But never more be officer of mine.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter Desdemona, attended</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.3.253">Look, if my gentle love be not raised up!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.254">I’ll make thee an example.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech73">
				<b>Desdemona</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.255">What’s the matter?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech74">
				<b>Othello</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.256">All’s well now, sweeting; come away to bed.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.257">Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.258">Lead him off.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>To Montano, who is led off</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.3.259">Iago, look with care about the town,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.260">And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.261">Come, Desdemona: ’tis the soldiers’ life</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.262">To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt all but Iago and Cassio</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech75">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.263">What, are you hurt, lieutenant?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech76">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.264">Ay, past all surgery.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech77">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.265">Marry, heaven forbid!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech78">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.266">Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.267">my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.268">myself, and what remains is bestial. My reputation,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.269">Iago, my reputation!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech79">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.270">As I am an honest man, I thought you had received</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.271">some bodily wound; there is more sense in that than</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.272">in reputation. Reputation is an idle and most false</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.273">imposition: oft got without merit, and lost without</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.274">deserving: you have lost no reputation at all,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.275">unless you repute yourself such a loser. What, man!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.276">there are ways to recover the general again: you</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.277">are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.278">policy than in malice, even so as one would beat his</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.279">offenceless dog to affright an imperious lion: sue</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.280">to him again, and he’s yours.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech80">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.281">I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.282">good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.283">indiscreet an officer. Drunk? and speak parrot?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.284">and squabble? swagger? swear? and discourse</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.285">fustian with one’s own shadow? O thou invisible</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.286">spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.287">let us call thee devil!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech81">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.288">What was he that you followed with your sword? What</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.289">had he done to you?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech82">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.290">I know not.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech83">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.291">Is’t possible?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech84">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.292">I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.293">a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O God, that men</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.294">should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.295">their brains! that we should, with joy, pleasance</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.296">revel and applause, transform ourselves into beasts!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech85">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.297">Why, but you are now well enough: how came you thus</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.298">recovered?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech86">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.299">It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.300">to the devil wrath; one unperfectness shows me</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.301">another, to make me frankly despise myself.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech87">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.302">Come, you are too severe a moraler: as the time,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.303">the place, and the condition of this country</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.304">stands, I could heartily wish this had not befallen;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.305">but, since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech88">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.306">I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell me</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.307">I am a drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.308">such an answer would stop them all. To be now a</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.309">sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.310">beast! O strange! Every inordinate cup is</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.311">unblessed and the ingredient is a devil.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech89">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.312">Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.313">if it be well used: exclaim no more against it.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.314">And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech90">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.315">I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech91">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.316">You or any man living may be drunk! at a time, man.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.317">I’ll tell you what you shall do. Our general’s wife</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.318">is now the general: may say so in this respect, for</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.319">that he hath devoted and given up himself to the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.320">contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.321">graces: confess yourself freely to her; importune</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.322">her help to put you in your place again: she is of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.323">so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.324">she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.325">than she is requested: this broken joint between</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.326">you and her husband entreat her to splinter; and, my</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.327">fortunes against any lay worth naming, this</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.328">crack of your love shall grow stronger than it was before.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech92">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.329">You advise me well.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech93">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.330">I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech94">
				<b>Cassio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.331">I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.332">beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.333">I am desperate of my fortunes if they cheque me here.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech95">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.334">You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant; I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.335">must to the watch.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.336">Cassio: Good night, honest Iago.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech96">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.337">And what’s he then that says I play the villain?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.338">When this advice is free I give and honest,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.339">Probal to thinking and indeed the course</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.340">To win the Moor again? For ’tis most easy</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.341">The inclining Desdemona to subdue</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.342">In any honest suit: she’s framed as fruitful</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.343">As the free elements. And then for her</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.344">To win the Moor⁠—were’t to renounce his baptism,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.345">All seals and symbols of redeemed sin,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.346">His soul is so enfetter’d to her love,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.347">That she may make, unmake, do what she list,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.348">Even as her appetite shall play the god</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.349">With his weak function. How am I then a villain</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.350">To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.351">Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.352">When devils will the blackest sins put on,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.353">They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.354">As I do now: for whiles this honest fool</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.355">Plies Desdemona to repair his fortunes</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.356">And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.357">I’ll pour this pestilence into his ear,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.358">That she repeals him for her body’s lust;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.359">And by how much she strives to do him good,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.360">She shall undo her credit with the Moor.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.361">So will I turn her virtue into pitch,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.362">And out of her own goodness make the net</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.363">That shall enmesh them all.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter Roderigo</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.3.364">How now, Roderigo!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech97">
				<b>Roderigo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.365">I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.366">hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My money is</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.367">almost spent; I have been to-night exceedingly well</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.368">cudgelled; and I think the issue will be, I shall</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.369">have so much experience for my pains, and so, with</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.370">no money at all and a little more wit, return again to Venice.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech98">
				<b>Iago</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.3.371">How poor are they that have not patience!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.372">What wound did ever heal but by degrees?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.373">Thou know’st we work by wit, and not by witchcraft;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.374">And wit depends on dilatory time.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.375">Does’t not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.376">And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashier’d Cassio:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.377">Though other things grow fair against the sun,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.378">Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.379">Content thyself awhile. By the mass, ’tis morning;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.380">Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.381">Retire thee; go where thou art billeted:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.382">Away, I say; thou shalt know more hereafter:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.383">Nay, get thee gone.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit Roderigo</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.3.384">Two things are to be done:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.385">My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.386">I’ll set her on;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.387">Myself the while to draw the Moor apart,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.388">And bring him jump when he may Cassio find</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.389">Soliciting his wife: ay, that’s the way</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.3.390">Dull not device by coldness and delay.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
